---
permalink: /
title: "Introduction"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

My name is Munib Inam and I am a PhD student at the Department of Agricultural Economics, University of Kentucky. For my PhD thesis, I am working on extreme weather events and their impact on agricultural and water resources.

Brief intro about myself:

Upload some current work here:

Essay abstracts:
======
The first essay of my PhD thesis looks at the impact of extreme weather events on agricultural productivity in the United States. While numerous studies have investigated the relationship between extreme weather events and agricultural productivity (Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; Lobell et al., 2011; Burke and Emerick, 2016; Montana et al., 2020; Schmitt, 2022; and Summer et. al., 2023), they are subject to measurement error in the weather variables. These studies employ weather data that has been spatially interpolated, a process which may inadvertently smooth out the extremes within the data and potentially bias the estimates by underrepresenting the magnitude of extreme weather events. This essay aims to refine weather measurement metrics to better understand these impacts and to evaluate the measurement error introduced by the spatial interpolation of weather data. The effects of extreme weather measures on agricultural productivity are then assessed using fixed effects regression models, focusing on corn yields across the corn belt region in the United States. Preliminary results indicate that there is a statistically significant difference in the impact of pre vs post interpolated weather measures, suggesting that spatial interpolation could potentially smooth out extremes, leading to biased estimates of extreme weather impacts. The results highlight the need for more accurate weather measures in agricultural economic research and offer insights for policymakers aiming to increase agricultural resilience in the face of future extreme weather events.

In the second essay, the main objective is to assess the impact of extreme weather events on drinking water quality in the United States. Extreme weather events have a detrimental effect on the economy, with water utility infrastructure being particularly susceptible as these events can lead to extensive damage to water supply systems, treatment facilities, and distribution networks. Climate literature posits that the frequency and intensity of these extreme weather events are on the rise due to global changes in climate. In Kentucky, the preliminary focal point of this essay, the water utility infrastructure is not only aging but was also constructed based on historical weather patterns, which have since shifted. As a result, deviations from typical weather will likely influence the quality of water provided by the water supply systems. This essay takes water quality violations (under the Safe Drinking Water Act) as proxy for assessing water quality and uses a logit model with temporal fixed effects to examine the impact of extreme weather events on the water quality provided by utilities in Kentucky. The preliminary findings indicate that an increase in extreme weather events results in more water quality violations —specifically, 'tier 1' violations, which represent a significant risk to public health. The analysis aims to highlight the relationship between extreme weather and water safety and help support the development of targeted strategies that strengthen water utility infrastructure against future extreme weather events.

The third essay investigates the effects of recent housing development in California on water consumption, with a focus on the implications during periods of extreme weather, e.g., the recent droughts. By utilizing a unique panel dataset of single-family residential monthly water use and lot size composition for water agencies in California, this essay estimates a water demand equation and identifies the impact of lot size composition on residential water use. Further, it provides preliminary evidence on whether contemporaneous conservation policies, such as the 2015 drought mandate, have been able to attenuate the effects of new housing developments on residential water use. Estimation results suggest that average monthly single-family household water usage is higher in water agencies with a higher share of houses with large lot sizes. These water agencies are generally more responsive to price changes and water restrictions (e.g., the 2015 drought mandate) than water agencies with a higher share of small lots. However, the exact pattern varies by region, which suggests that local factors such as regional climate, population density and the types of water usage are important determinants of water demand. This essay provides important policy insights into the dynamics of water use across water agencies and regions with different structural characteristics. The findings not only inform the development of targeted water conservation strategies in the face of increasing intensity and frequency of droughts, and the resulting water scarcity in the region, but also underscore the importance of regional specificity in water policy design.



